Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lange.
Warren Norwood, a newly emerged science fiction writer who was a finalist in the balloting
for the 1983 John W. Campbell Award, the award given annually to the best new writer.
Norwood hit the scene with his first novel in a series dubbed The Windhover Tapes.
Volume 1 is an image of voices.
Volume 2, flexing the warp.
And Volume 3, fies of the Gabriel Ratchets.
The protagonist is Gerard Manley, a space-faring diplomat who journeys in a sentient craft
called The Windhover.
We asked Norwood if by any coincidence the series had anything to do with Gerard Manley
Hopkins, the 19th century English poet.
Yeah, it's my left-handed salute to the old man.
I mean, I think he was a poet who was probably 100 years ahead of his time.
He's not one of those poets that you walk around reciting verses to at people's and
being parties.
But I think he did marvelous, I think he took marvelous chances with the language and marvelous
chances with poetry.
And some of it is just, you know, it's breathtaking.
But no one's going to read a tribute to Gerard Manley Hopkins.
So, when I sat down to do the story, I had already decided that I was going to name the
ship Windhover, which is his most famous poem, The Windhover.
And it just seemed, you know, the natural thing to do, the name the character Gerard
Manley, especially since he is interested in poetry, right?
And then in the second book, when Gerard finds himself at the end of his road and thinks
this is going to be it, it's going to be all over.
He writes a poem to GM, which is himself, right?
But it's also the poem to Gerard Manley Hopkins.
And it echoes the language of the Windhover, Hopkins the Windhover.
It echoes that language and asks some of the same questions only from Gerard's point of
view rather than from Hopkins' point of view.
So yeah, it's all very intentional.
I mean, with 54-hour minor in English, it's hard to be unintentional about things like
that.
So the series is filled with all sorts of illusions to Hopkins that should please any English
major.
We were curious about the type of audience at which Norwood was aiming.
After all, not all readers are English majors.
I think it was Raymond Chandler, but I'm not sure who said that I write first to entertain
myself and hope that others are entertained.
I had a certain audience awareness in that when I went back and did the second draft,
I simplified the language somewhat from the original draft because I thought I had gotten
too carried away.
But I didn't write it thinking of a specific audience.
For those books, I really didn't have an audience in mind.
It was just a story that I had been thinking about for eight or nine months, and I wanted
to tell.
And that seemed more important.
And then when I made the decision about how to tell the story, I knew without deliberating
on it a great deal that I had limited my audience.
But I thought, well, I'm willing to take the chance because I figured I needed something
to break into the market.
And I think you have to take chances to do that.
Manly is a galactic diplomat in an image of voices, although he abandons this role in
the subsequent novels.
Say galactic diplomat to a science fiction fan and he'll respond, Ratif, meaning Keith
Laumer's famous protagonist.
We asked Norwood if Ratif influenced the character of Gerard Manly.
I tried not to make Gerard not like Ratif, while still maintaining that he was a great
intergalactic diplomat role.
I tried to make him a very different kind of diplomat.
But there were times, in fact, in the first draft, there are sections where it got a little
Ratif-like kind of unconsciously, and then I had to go back and say, gee, I think I read
this somewhere before, and I didn't write it.
And then you have to go back and clean things up.
More with Warren Norwood on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Ayn.
And Bill Vernon.
The cover on each novel in Warren Norwood's Science Fiction series, The Windhover Tapes,
features a complimentary blurb written by Anne McCaffrey, the author of the famous Dragon Books.
McCaffrey wrote in a blurb on the back of the first novel, An Image of Voices, that she
had known of Norwood's ambitions for four years.
We asked Norwood about his relationship with Anne McCaffrey.
I was a book salesman for Ballantine.
And Ballantine Delray did the McCaffrey Dragon Books, among others.
And when she did the first promotion tour around the country for the hardcover edition of White Dragon,
I cornered the Delray direct salesman and said, if you don't get her into some of my wholesale accounts,
you know, I'm going to break your knees.
Besides, I want to meet her.
I mean, there's other reasons besides.
So I got her into, I think, three of the accounts, and then we took her to the airport together,
and her plane was an hour and a half late.
So we sat in the bar in the airport drinking Coors Beer, which is one of her favorites,
and she can't get in Ireland, and listening to Annie Tell Stories, which is a marvelous experience
in and of itself.
When she came back the following year for the paperback tour for White Dragon, my wife and I picked her up
at the airport, took her to the hotel in Dallas, which was on fire at the time, so that was all very exciting.
She was extremely tired.
It was the 23rd day of a 28-day tour in 31 cities or something like that, and she was beginning.
So we ended up staying until like one or two o'clock in the morning because she couldn't sleep
and just talking and chatting, and then I took her around all the next day with a case of Coors Beer iced down in the back
and about three melons all diced up because you can't get fresh melon in Ireland either, right?
So she munched on melon and drank Coors Beer all day while we toured Dallas and Fort Worth
and visited bookstores and radio stations and developed a grand rapport and ended up at the airport
drinking Coors Beer and having a wonderful time.
So we corresponded then fairly regularly, I say fairly regularly, three or four times a year after that,
and after I finished the book and Bantam had bought it, they said, you know, who do you know?
And I said, well, the author I know best is Anne McCaffrey, and so I asked her, I said, you know, would you read it?
And she said yes. And then she said those wonderful things, and I don't remember anything for about a week
after getting that letter, you know.
Annie's letter was as much of a high as the sale, right, because it was some kind of confirmation that I had in fact done it right.
It was as much of a high as the sale was itself.
The bookstores and radio stations were in the same place.
Norwood originally envisioned the Windhover tapes as a trilogy, and he wrote it as such.
But then it was announced later that the series would be four books long, a totrology.
We asked Norwood why the change.
Anne McCaffrey, it's Anne McCaffrey's fault, I'm not going to blame it on Annie.
She wrote after she has read all the books in manuscript now.
When after she finished the third book, she wrote me this long, long letter asking me this whole list of questions.
She said, you have answered all the main questions in the story, I'm not objecting to that, but I want to know this, and I want to know that, and I want to know this, and I want to know that, and are you ever going to talk about this, and are you ever going to talk about that?
And she said, either write me a long letter back or write another book.
So I laughingly shared that letter with my editor and started thinking about the answers to those questions, but it hadn't gotten beyond that point until the first book started to sell really well.
And then my editor said, gee, you ought to think about the fourth book.
And I said, well, the only way I'll do a fourth book if it's the final book, because I don't want an endless series.
If I can make this the final book, and under these conditions, then I will write it, and I will answer Annie's question.
So the fourth book is going to be to answer Annie's questions.
That's what started the whole thing.
It's Anne McCaffrey's fault.
Bloods her heart.
We'll have more with Warren Norwood on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
A number of people write poetry. They do so for various reasons, among them for escape, as a creative outlet, or for self-expression.
Quite a few science fiction writers compose poetry as well. Gene Wolfe, Ray Bradbury, and Michael Bishop, for instance.
But it's virtually impossible to make a living solely by writing and selling poetry.
A few magazines and anthologies purchase poems, but the pay is a pittance.
The poets among us must write it for love, not money. But one science fiction writer, Warren Norwood, has chosen a different tack.
As we discussed previously, his Windhover series owes a lot to the poet Gerard Manley Hopkins. Norwood, a poet as well as a writer, inserts his own poems in his novels.
Here he comments on this practice.
Oh yes, yes. One of the motives up Borenda in the very beginning was to bootleg the poetry into the story.
In fact, it was the tenderfoot cycle of poems which helped me formulate how I wanted to put the story together.
And all the tenderfoot poems aren't in there, fortunately.
But that was part of what I wanted to do in the books, because I thought, again, that was something else that was...
I was taking enough chances. I thought, I'll take one more. I'll go ahead and try this and see what happens.
I've been writing poetry since I was nine, so I obviously believe in it in some form or another.
So I thought, why not do that and see if we can make it work?
And I was very fortunate and found an editor who believed in it after having talked to several others who did not believe in it at all.
We wondered if writing poetry helped Norwood write fiction.
I think so because if you write poetry regularly and try constantly to improve it, and you're constantly working with the language,
you're constantly trying to squeeze from the language as much meaning as possible.
So it makes you extremely cognizant of words and their meanings and their subtleties and shades of meanings.
I think that writing poetry can also hurt your prose.
I think that you can, in fact, get too poetic. You're trying to put too much in. You're trying to make your prose too poetic.
I marvel at some of the stuff that Gene Wolfe writes.
I mean, I think some of his prose just blows me away.
But at the same time, I think that sometimes he sticks with a level of writing that is almost too poetic for the part of the story he's trying to tell,
that instead of doing it in rhythms, he's so caught up in that rhythm, so caught up in that level, that poetic level,
that he can't bring it down to a faster, cleaner action scene where you get out of that and you sweep the reader along and then pull them back up to another poetic height.
And so I think, you know, this is not to criticize Gene Wolfe, but it's to say that I think that because he is a poet,
and because he is so poetically involved with the language, that it has detracted a little bit from what he might have otherwise done with the story.
Of course, all this is envy on my part because if I could write prose like Gene Wolfe writes, I would be a very happy man.
Gerard Manley, Norwood's protagonist in the Windhover tape series, analyzes poetry from many worlds in his spare time with the help of his sentient ship, Windhover.
We asked Norwood if there are present day computers capable of analyzing poetry in the same fashion.
Very crude ones at this stage of the game, but there's been work that's been done on that.
Several universities have done experimental programming with programming computers to write poetry, programming computers to translate poetry,
and it's all at a very crude level, so my extrapolation of that is a big stretch.
But I thought, given the progress of technology that in 7,000 years it seemed reasonable that we'd figure out how to do it.
We'll have more with Warren Norwood on our next show.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Warren Norwood's series, the Windhover tapes, is an imaginative blend of hard science and characterization.
The protagonist is Gerard Manley, a space-faring diplomat and scholar.
Much of the verse 2 volumes is written in a unique style, internal dialogue between Manley and his self.
Manley recalls dreams in the early volumes.
These allow him to reconstruct his past, a past detailed in the third volume, Fies of the Gabriel Ratchets.
We ask Norwood if he dreams as Manley does.
I dreamed a great deal from the time I, well, from somewhere in the middle of Vietnam until about 6, 7 years afterward.
And I think that's the major influence on Gerard's dreams.
And they were very vivid and they were very recallable in the same way that he recalls them, where I could, they would start as fragments when I woke up and then I could pull them back.
I could bring more pieces back into the dream.
That kind of faded off after about 6, 7 years after I got back from Vietnam and I don't do nearly as much of it.
But that's where it came from, that process came from.
And then in Gerard's case, it's part of what he suspects and he's getting a mirror image of what was of a prescient talent.
And his prescientism is in effect kind of turned around and giving him a way to look back into his past, warped by the mind-wipers.
Norwood does not write science fiction in the lecture mode. Rather, he allows the context of the story to explain itself. He relies on other devices as well.
I did what a great number of science fiction writers do and that is I built on what had gone before.
And there's such a huge basis now of groundwork that has been done for us that we don't have to spend a lot of time explaining how this works and how that works.
And you know, oh actually this warp takes us through techie on space, blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah.
We can just use key words and key concepts and the reader has already been grounded in that.
And then you can spend more time telling the story instead of having more time explaining all the mechanical functions.
There's a hard science, there's a big hard science story that I really want to write but I don't think I have the skills yet as a writer to do it.
So I'm saving that one for when I'm better trained in my craft.
We mentioned that Norwood's series is a character study as well. A good example is Norwood's treatment of mainly his relationship with his wife, Sheryl.
Manly meets Sheryl early in the first volume in Image of Voices. She is a researcher on the planet Mosin, there to research universal legends among civilized worlds.
Manly shares this interest too.
Manly and Sheryl slowly fall in love and the second volume, Flexing the Warp, they marry in an elaborate ceremony.
A good bit of Flexing the Warp deals with Sheryl's pregnancy. This is certainly a novelty in a science fiction work.
The details are so vivid and realistic that we had to ask Norwood if he had gone through a pregnancy himself.
Through the pregnancy and through a miscarriage before it, so that I took all that and you write what you know and so I put that in there because those were very important times of my life when they happened.
I was there when my daughter was born in the delivery room and that's why we got to have the big group scene when Serena is born.
Everybody ought to get to share this experience because it was really a lot of fun.
And again one of those gratifying things is to have a fan come up and say, gee I really like female fans especially.
You really got that down, I really understand that.
Husbands come up and say, my wife was like that when she was pregnant.
I mean, Gerard makes a wonderful comment in there that maybe women change species when they're pregnant.
There's some biological basis for that.
On our next show, more with Warren Norwood.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Ever wonder how an author goes about writing a book, how the storyline develops, where characters come from?
We had occasion to ask these questions of Science Fiction writer Warren Norwood.
Character with a problem.
That's how most of my stories began as a character with a problem.
I write short stories that are unsayable because the characters have problems that are either so bizarre or so obscene,
or something else that even though the problem gets resolved by the end of the story that no one's really interested in, that's fine because I just write them for fun.
There are characters who pop into my head with this particular problem and I let them run through that section of their lives until they solve the problem and then they go back in the drawer.
And I've gotten them out of my head, which is the most important thing.
But I start with a character with a problem and very shortly thereafter, I say shortly, usually in terms of two to three weeks for a novel length work,
I have a very good idea of how the story ends.
So I have a beginning and an ending and the middle is just, it's like standing, I remember as a kid standing, the first time I went through Tennessee and standing on one of those overlooks.
And looking out across to the mountains on the other side and there was nothing but fog and mist in the bottom, well that's kind of how I feel when I get ready to start a novel.
I know where I am and I know where the mountain is on the other side, but what's in the middle there?
I don't know except you have to go down and you have to come back up in order to get there.
And then that middle resolves itself in a very vague way as I begin the story.
Norwood then told us that after the story is set, the characters often develop lives of their own.
And I found the more that I try to put my characters through paces in the middle to do certain things, the less cooperative they become.
So what I try to do then is tap them back in the line when they start pushing the plot too far away.
I think I'll never get to the end this way if you guys keep going left.
Edge a little right and make me happy.
So I nudge them back to the right a little bit and then they head back there and then they go way off too far to the right and then you have to nudge them back to the left.
It's a strange process.
Especially when they come alive in the back of your head and they start saying things and doing things that you didn't expect them to do.
An example of this process can be seen in Sherrill, the lead female character in Norwood's Windhover tape series.
Sherrill's pregnancy is a perfect example of that.
I mean she wasn't supposed to get pregnant for another six months in the story because I had to get them where they were going first, right?
I was going to have her get pregnant someplace safe.
Oh no, she had to get pregnant and she and Jorart had to argue about it and then I was angry at both of them
and then I had to back off and take five pages out of the manuscript and say, wait a minute.
Take them back to the beginning of that scene and say, it's your problem. You work it out. I'll write it down.
You just tell me what's right now.
And so I let them argue about the problem and solve their difficulties and it was all fine.
And I learned a valuable lesson. Keep your cotton picking hands off their lives when they're doing it themselves.
Norwood recently published a novel with Ralph Mileyus called The Sarencynicals.
The independence their characters achieved caused interesting problems for the co-authors.
When Ralph and I did our book, one of the things that happened was we started with a male protagonist and then a minor protagonist who was female.
And she came alive for me about the same time that he came alive for Ralph.
And so Ralph was writing the first draft and he was putting words in her mouth and then when I was reading it and getting ready to write the second draft,
she was in the back of my head screaming, no, no, no, I wouldn't say that. I wouldn't react like that.
So I'd get on the phone to Ralph and I'd say, Calissa says that she wouldn't react like this.
And he said, well, we'll work it out tomorrow at our story conference and we'd sit there for eight hours trying to hash out dialogue between a character who was alive in his head
and a character who was alive in my head. And he had to have enough sense of that to go back then and write first draft material based on what I had told him about a character who was living in my head.
The only thing that saved us was that some character didn't come alive that way for both of us, right, who then would have been schizophrenic.
He'd have been alive one way and Ralph's head and another way in my head and we probably had to do something. We'd have to divide him into two characters.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
.